docs: Adds doc about experimental exports (hooks + components) (#2192)
vtex/faststore: apps/site/pages/docs/experimental-exports.mdx

---
title: 'Experimental Exports - Hooks & Components'
sidebar_label: 'Experimental Exports - Hooks & Components'
---

import { Callout } from 'nextra-theme-docs'

<header>

# Experimental Exports - Hooks & Components

</header>

> Utilize the helpful hooks and components provided by `@faststore/core` when customizing your application's components.
> 
> While some hooks are readily available through `@faststore/sdk`, others, like accessing cart and session data, are not accessible through this method.
> Although users can manually implement some of these hooks, we believe in promoting simplicity, code reuse, and experimentation. To facilitate this, we've made these hooks available for direct import into your Starter project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When overriding a native component or creating a new FastStore section, you can import the hooks and components from [`@faststore/core`](https://chat.openai.com/docs/getting-started/3-project-structure#faststorecore) to customize specific functionalities without starting from scratch.

Although some hooks are accessible through `@faststore/sdk`, certain functionalities, such as accessing cart and session data, require the use of hooks and components from `@faststore/core`.
```

<Callout type="warning" emoji="⚠️">

>   It's important to note that all exports are suffixed with `_unstable` to
>   clearly indicate that the support is experimental.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All exports are suffixed with `_unstable` to indicate that the support is experimental.
```

</Callout>

---

## Usage

> You can import it into your component from `@faststore/core/experimental` as the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Import the hook or component into your component from `@faststore/core/experimental`:

```tsx
import { use{ComponentName}_unstable as use{ComponentName} } from '@faststore/core/experimental'
```
In the following example, the `useCartToggleButton_unstable` hook was imported to enhance the custom buy button
with the ability to toggle the cart, and benefeting from the behavior of the `useCartToggleButton`.

```

> ```tsx copy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```tsx {3} copy
```

import React from 'react'
import { Button as UIButton } from '@faststore/ui'
import { useCartToggleButton_unstable as useCartToggleButton } from '@faststore/core/experimental'

export default function CustomBuyButton() {
  const { onClick: toggleCart } = useCartToggleButton()
  return (
    <UIButton
      variant="primary"
      onClick={() => {
        toggleCart()
      }}
    >
      New Buy Button
    </UIButton>
  )
}
```

## Available Exports

Explore the functionalities of the hooks and components, also find the up-to-date list of available experimental exports directly within the codebase: [@faststore/core/experimental](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/main/packages/core/src/experimental/index.ts).

> #### Hooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Hooks
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functions that provide a way to import some of the functionalities or state of native components to your custom components. The hooks provided by `@faststore/core/experimental` include:

```

- useSession_unstable
- sessionStore_unstable
- validateSession_unstable
- useCart_unstable
- cartStore_unstable
- useBuyButton_unstable
- useCartToggleButton_unstable
- useCheckoutButton_unstable
- useRemoveButton_unstable
- useQuery_unstable
- useLazyQuery_unstable
- useNewsletter_unstable
- useDiscountPercent_unstable
- useFormattedPrice_unstable
- useLocalizedVariables_unstable
- useProductGalleryQuery_unstable
- useProductLink_unstable
- useProductQuery_unstable
- useProductsPrefetch_unstable
- useSearchHistory_unstable
- useSuggestions_unstable
- useTopSearch_unstable
- useFilter_unstable
- useDelayedFacets_unstable
- useDelayedPagination_unstable
- getShippingSimulation_unstable
- useShippingSimulation_unstable

> #### Components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Components
```

- Image_unstable

> <Callout type="info" emoji="ℹ️">

Author: @eduardoformiga and @Mariana-Caetano I've added this callout and example of using Image component, can you review it again pls ☺️

Reviewer 2: Good Job, @hellofanny.

Since this component comes from the core package instead of components. I think we should give more visibility of how to use it and how it's defined somehow. 
https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/105a8b2f69ffd8438532d7c9eb959ed26a567675/packages/core/src/components/ui/Image/Image.tsx

Author: Thanks forms!! Sounds good, for now I've just linked the component to the code 🙈 . But I've added another [task](https://vtex-dev.atlassian.net/browse/FS-1599?atlOrigin=eyJpIjoiNDg0ZDNlZDI2MGJmNDFhZDhiZTE3ZDc2ZWJmNjNiNTQiLCJwIjoiaiJ9) just for it.

> <Callout type="info" emoji="ℹ️">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>   We highly recommend using the Image component when working with images in your
>   application to enhance the storefront performance. This component leverages an
>   image resizing and cropping service, called Thumbor, which caches the results
>   on CDN. (Use it when the image is uploaded in the VTEX admin, whether in the
>   CMS or Catalog.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We highly recommend using the Image component when working with images in your application to enhance storefront performance. This component utilizes a service called [Thumbor](https://www.thumbor.org/) for image resizing and cropping, with the results cached on a Content Delivery Network (CDN). Utilize it whenever an image is uploaded in the VTEX admin, whether in the CMS or Catalog.
```

> </Callout>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
